@c Copyright (C) 2000, 2009 Red Hat, Inc.
@c This file is part of the CGEN manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file cgen.texi.

@node Introduction
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Introduction to CGEN

@menu
* Overview::
* CPU description language::
* Opcodes support::
* Simulator support::
* Testing support::
@end menu

@node Overview
@section Overview

CGEN is a project to provide a framework and toolkit for writing cpu tools.

@menu
* Goal::                        What CGEN tries to achieve.
* Why do it?::
* Maybe it should not be done?::
* How ambitious is CGEN?::
* What is missing that should be there someday?::
@end menu

@node Goal
@subsection Goal

The goal of CGEN (pronounced @emph{seejen}, and short for
"Cpu tools GENerator") is to provide a uniform framework and toolkit
for writing programs like assemblers, disassemblers, and
simulators without explicitly closing any doors on future things one
might wish to do.  In the end, its scope is the things the software developer
cares about when writing software for the cpu (compilation, assembly,
linking, simulation, profiling, debugging, ???).

Achieving the goal is centered around having an application independent
description of a CPU (plus environment, like ABI) that applications can then
make use of.  In the end that's a lot to ask for from one language.  What
applications can or should be able to use CGEN is left to evolve over time.
The description language itself is thus also left to evolve over time!

Achieving the goal also involves having a toolkit, libcgen, that contains
a compiled form of the cpu description plus a suite of routines for working
with the data.
@footnote{@file{libcgen} currently doesn't exist, but that was the
original plan.}

CGEN is not a new idea.  Some GNU ports have done something like this --
for example, the SH port in its early days.  However, the idea never really
``caught on''.  CGEN was started because I think it should.

Since CGEN is a very ambitious project, there are currently lots of
things that aren't written down, let alone implemented.  It will take
some time to flush all the details out, but in and of itself that doesn't
necessarily mean they can't be flushed out, or that they haven't been
considered.

@node Why do it?
@subsection Why do it?

I think it is important that GNU assembler/disassembler/simulator ports
be done from a common framework.  On some level it's fun doing things
from scratch, which was and still is to a large extent current
practice, but this is not the place for that.

@itemize @bullet
@item the more ports of something one has, the more important it is that they
be the same.

@item the more complex each of them become, the more important it is
that they be the same.

@item if they all are the same, a feature added to one is added to all
of them--within the context of their similarity, of course.

@item with a common framework in place the planning of how to architect
a port is taken care of, the main part of what's left is simply writing
the CPU description.

@item the more applications that use the common framework, the fewer
places the data needs to be typed in and maintained.

@item new applications can take advantage of data and utilities that
already exist.

@item a common framework provides a better launching point for bigger things.
@end itemize

@node Maybe it should not be done?
@subsection Maybe it should not be done?

However, no one has yet succeeded in pushing for such an extensive common
framework.@footnote{I'm just trying to solicit input here.  Maybe these
questions will help get that input.}

@itemize @bullet
@item maybe people think it's not worth it?

@item maybe they just haven't had the inclination to see it through?
(where ``inclination'' includes everything from the time it would take
to the dealing with the various parties whose turf you would tread on)

@item maybe in the case of assemblers and simulators they're not complex
enough to see much benefit?

@item maybe the resulting tight coupling among the various applications
will cause problems that offset any gains?

@item maybe there's too much variance to try to achieve a common
framework, so that all attempts are doomed to become overly complex?

@item as a corollary of the previous item, maybe in the end trying to
combine ISA syntax (the assembly language), with ISA semantics (simulation),
with architecture implementation (performance), would become overly complex?
@end itemize

@node How ambitious is CGEN?
@subsection How ambitious is CGEN?

CGEN is a very ambitious project, as future projects can be:

@menu
* More complicated simulators::
* Profiling tools::
* Program analysis tools::
* ABI description::
* Machine generated architecture reference material::
* Tools like what NJMCT provides::
* Input to a compiler backend::
* Hardware/software codesign::
@end menu

@node More complicated simulators
@subsubsection More complicated simulators

Current CGEN-based simulators achieve their speed by using GCC's
"computed goto" facility to implement a threaded interpreter.
The "main loop" of the cpu engine is contained within one function
and the administrivia of running the program is reduced to about three
host instructions per target instruction (one to increment a "virtual pc",
one to fetch the address of code that implements that next target instruction,
and one to branch to it).  Target instructions can be simulated with as few as
seven@footnote{Actually, this can be reduced even more by creating copies of
an instruction specialized for all the various inputs.} instructions for an
"add" (load address of src1, load src1, load address of src2, load src2, add,
load address of result, store result).  So ignoring overhead (which
is minimal for frequently executed code) that's ten host instructions per
"typical" target instruction.  Pretty good.@footnote{The actual results
depend, of course, on the exact mix of target instructions in the application,
what instructions the host cpu has, and how efficiently the rest of the
simulator is (e.g. floating point and memory operations can require a hundred
or more host instructions).}

However, things can still be better.  There is still some implementation
related overhead that can be removed.  The two instructions to branch
to the next instruction would be unnecessary if instruction executors
were concatenated together.  The fetching and storing of target registers
can be reduced if target registers were kept in host registers across
instruction boundaries (and the longer one can keep them in host registers
the better).  A consequence of both of these improvements is the number
of memory operations is drastically reduced.  There isn't a lot of ILP
in the simulation of target instructions to hide memory latencies.
Another consequence of these improvements is the opportunity to perform
inter-target-instruction scheduling of the host instructions and other
optimizations.

There are two ways to achieve these improvements.  Both involve converting
basic blocks (or superblocks) in the target application into the host
instruction set and compiling that.  The first way involves doing this
"offline".  The target program is analyzed and each instruction is converted
into, for example, C code that implements the instruction.  The result is
compiled and then the new version of the target program is run.

The second way is to do the translation from target instruction set to
host instruction set while the target program is running.  This is often
referred to as JIT (Just In Time) simulation (FIXME: proper phrasing here?).
One way to implement this is to simulate instructions the way existing
CGEN simulators do, but keep track of how frequently a basic block is
executed.  If a block gets executed often enough, then compile a translation
of it to the host instruction set and switch to using that.  This avoids
the overhead of doing the compilation on code that is rarely executed.
Note that here is one place where a dual cpu system can be put to good use.
One cpu handles the simulation and the other handles compilation (translating
target instructions to host instructions).
CGEN can@footnote{This hasn't actually been implemented so there is
some hand waving here.} handle a large part of building the JIT compiler
because both host and target architectures are recorded in a way that is
amenable to program manipulation.

A hybrid of these two ways is to translate target basic blocks to
C code, compile it, and dynamically load the result into the running
simulation.  Problems with this are that one must invoke an external program
(though one could dynamically load a special form of C compiler I suppose)
and there's a lot of overhead parsing and optimizing the C code.  On the
other hand one gets to take full advantage of the compiler's optimization
technology.  And if the application takes a long time to simulate, the
extra cost may be worthwhile.  A dual cpu system is of benefit here too.

@node Profiling tools
@subsubsection Profiling tools

It is useful to know how well an architecture is being utilized.
For one, this helps build better architectures.  It also helps determine
how well a compilation system is using an architecture.

CGEN-based simulators already compute instruction frequency counts.
It's straightforward to add register frequency counts.
Monitoring other aspects of the ISA is also possible.  The description
file provides all the necessary data, all that's needed is to write a
generator for an application that then performs the desired analysis.

Function unit, pipeline, and other architecture implementation related items
requires a lot more effort but it is doable.  The guideline for this effort
is again coming up with an application-independent specification of these
things.

CGEN does not currently support memory or cache profiling.
Obviously they're important, and support may be added in the future.
One thing that would be straightforward to add is the building of
trace data for usage by cache and memory analysis tools.
The point though is that these tools won't benefit much from CGEN's
existence.

Another kind of profiling tool is one that takes the program to
be profiled as input, inserts profiling code into it, and then generates
a new version of the program which is then run.@footnote{Note that there
are other uses for such a program modification tool besides profiling.}
Recorded in CGEN's description files should be all the necessary ISA related
data to do this.  One thing that's missing is code to handle the file format
and relocations.@xref{ABI description}.

@node Program analysis tools
@subsubsection Program analysis tools

Related to profiling tools are static program analysis tools.
By this I mean taking machine code as input and analyzing it in some way.
Except for symbolic information (which could come from BFD or elsewhere),
CGEN provides enough information to analyze machine code, both the
raw instructions *and* their semantics.  Libcgen should contain
all the basic tools for doing this.
@footnote{Today this is libopcodes to some degree.}

@node ABI description
@subsubsection ABI description

Several tools need knowledge of not only a cpu's ISA but also of the ABI
in use.  I think(!) it makes sense to apply the same goals that went into
CGEN's architecture description language to an ABI description language:
specify the ABI in an application independent way and then have a basic
toolkit/library that provides ways of using that data.
It might be useful to also allow the writing of program generators
for applications that want more than what the toolkit/library provides.
Perhaps not, but the basic toolkit/library should, again I think,
be useful.

Part of what an ABI defines is the file format and relocations.
This is something that BFD is built for.  I think a BFD rewrite
should happen and should be based, at least in part, on a CGEN-style
ABI description.  This rewrite would be one user of the ABI description,
but certainly not the only user.
One problem with this approach is that BFD requires a lot of file format
specific C code.  I doubt all of this code is amenable to being described
in an application independent way.  Careful separation of such things
will be necessary.  It may even be useful to ignore old file formats
and limit such a BFD rewrite to ELF (not that ELF is free from such
warts, of course).

@node Machine generated architecture reference material
@subsubsection Machine generated architecture reference material

Engineers often need to refer to architecture documentation.
One problem is that there's often only so many hardcopy manuals
to go around.  Since the CPU description contains a lot of the information
engineers need to find it makes sense to convert that information back
into a readable form.  The manual can then be online available to everyone.
Furthermore, each architecture will be documented using the same style
making it easier to move from architecture to architecture.

@node Tools like what NJMCT provides
@subsubsection Tools like what NJMCT provides

NJMCT is the New Jersey Machine Code Toolkit.
It focuses exclusively on the encoding and decoding of instructions.
[FIXME: wip, need to say more].

@node Input to a compiler backend
@subsubsection Input to a compiler backend

One can define a GCC port to include these four things:

@itemize @bullet
@item cpu architecture description
@item cpu implementation description
@item ABI description
@item miscellaneous
@end itemize

The CGEN description provides all of the cpu architecture description
that the compiler needs.
However, the current design of the CPU description language is geared
towards going from machine instructions to semantic content, whereas
what a compiler wants is to do is go from semantic content to machine
instructions, so in the end this might not be a reasonable thing to
pursue.  On the other hand, that problem can be solved in part by
specifying two sets of semantics for each instruction: one for the 
compiler side of things, and one for the simulator side of things.
Frequently they will be the same thing and thus need only be specified once.
Though specifying them twice, for the two different contexts, is reasonable
I think.  If the two versions of the semantics are used by multiple applications
this makes even more sense.

The planned rewrite of model support in CGEN will support whatever the
compiler needs for the implementation description.

Compilers also need to know the target's ABI, which isn't relevant for
an architecture description.  On the other hand, more than just the
compiler needs knowledge of the ABI.  Thus it makes sense to think about
how many tools there are that need this knowledge and whether one can
come up with a unifying description of the ABI.  Hence one future
project is to add the ABI description to CGEN.  This would encompass in
essence most of what is contained in the System V ABI documentation.

That leaves the "miscellaneous" part.  Essentially this is a catchall
for whatever else is needed.  This would include things like
include file directory locations, port-specific language features, ???.
There's not much need to include this info in CGEN, it's pretty
esoteric and generally useful to only a few applications.

One can even envision a day when GCC emits object files directly.
The instruction description contains enough information to build
the instructions and the ABI support would provide enough
information on relocations and object file formats.

Debugging information should be treated as an orthogonal concept.
At present it is outside the scope of CGEN, though clearly the same
reasoning behind CGEN applies to debugging support as well.

@node Hardware/software codesign
@subsubsection Hardware/software codesign

This section isn't very well thought out -- not much time has been put
into it.  The thought is that some interface with VHDL/Verilog could
be created that would assist hw/sw codesign.

Another related application is to have a feedback mechanism from the
compilation system that helps improve the architecture description
(both CGEN and HDL).
CGEN descriptions for experimental instructions could be added,
and a new set of compilation tools quickly regenerated.
Then experiments could be run analyzing the effectiveness of the
new instructions.

@node What is missing that should be there someday?
@subsection What's missing that should be there someday?

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for complex ISA's (i386, m68k).

Early versions had the framework of the support, but it's all bit-rotten.

@item ABI description

As discussed elsewhere, one thing that many tools need knowledge of besides
the ISA is the ABI.  Clearly ABI's are orthogonal to ISA's and one cpu
may have multiple ABI's running on it.  Thus the ABI description needs to
be independent of the architecture description.  It would still be useful
for the ABI to refer to things in the architecture description.

@item Model description

The current design is enough to get reasonable cycle counts from
the simulator but it doesn't take into account all the uses one would
want to make of this data.

@item File organization

I believe a lot of what is in libopcodes should be moved to libcgen.
Libcgen will contain the bulk of the cpu description in processed form.
It will also contain a suite of utilities for accessing the data.

ABI support could either live in libcgen or separately in libcgenabi.
libbfd would be a user of this library.

Instruction semantics should also be recorded in libcgen, probably
in bytecode form.  Operand usage tables, needed for example by the
m32r assembler, could be lazily computed at runtime.
Operand usage tables are also useful to gdb's reverse-execution support.

Applications can either make use of libcgen or given the application
independence of the description language they can write their own code
generators to tailor the output as needed.

@end itemize

@node CPU description language
@section CPU description language

The goal of CGEN is to provide a uniform and extensible framework for
doing assemblers/disassemblers and simulators, as well as allowing
further tools to be developed as necessary.

With that in mind I think the place to start is in defining a CPU
description language that is sufficiently powerful for all the current
and perceived future needs: an application independent description of
the CPU.  From the CPU description, tables and code can be generated
that an application framework can then use (e.g. opcode table for
assembly/disassembly, decoder/executor for simulation).

By "application independence" I mean the data is recorded in a way that
doesn't intentionally close any doors on uses of the data.  One example of
this is using RTL to describe instruction semantics rather than, say, C.
The assembler can also make use of the instruction semantics.  It doesn't
make use of the semantics, per se, but what it does use is the input and
output operand information that is machine generated from the semantics.
Grokking operand usage from C is possible, but harder.
@footnote{By this I mean analyzing the C and understanding what it's doing.}
So by writing the semantics in RTL multiple applications can make use of it.
One can also generate from the RTL code in languages other than C.

@menu
* Language requirements::
* Layout::
* Language problems::
@end menu

@node Language requirements
@subsection Language requirements

The CPU description file needs to provide at least the following:

@itemize @bullet
@item elements of the CPU's architecture (registers, etc.)
@item elements of a CPU's implementation (e.g. pipeline)
@item how the bits of an instruction word map to the instruction's semantics
@item semantic specification in a way that is amenable to being
understood and manipulated
@item performance measurement parameters
@item support for multiple architecture and implementation variants
@item assembler syntax of the instruction set
@item how that syntax maps to the bits of the instruction word, and back
@item support for generating test files
@item ???
@end itemize

In addition to this, elements of the particular ABI in use is also needed.
These things will obviously need to be defined separately from the cpu
for obvious reasons.

@itemize @bullet
@item file format
@item relocations
@item function calling conventions
@item structure layout
@item ... and all the other usual stuff
@end itemize

Some architectures require knowledge of the pipeline in order to do
accurate simulation (because, for example, some registers don't have
interlocks) so that will be required as well, as opposed to being solely
for performance measurement.  Pipeline knowledge is also needed in order
to achieve accurate profiling information.  However, I haven't spent
much time on this yet.  The current design/implementation is a first
pass in order to get something reasonable, and will be revisited
as necessary.

Support for generating test files is not complete.  Currently the GAS
test suite generator gets by (barely) without them.  The simulator test
suite generator just generates templates and leaves the programmer to
fill in the details.  But I think this information should be present,
meaning that for situations where test vectors can't be derived from the
existing specs, new specs should be added as part of the description
language.  This would make writing testcases an integral part of writing
the .cpu file.  Clearly there is a risk in having machine generated
testcases - but there are ways to eliminate or control the risk.

The syntax of a suitable description language needs to have these
properties:

@itemize @bullet
@item simple
@item expressive
@item easily parsed
@item easy to learn
@item understandable by program generators
@item extensible
@end itemize

It would also help to not start over completely from scratch.  GCC's RTL
satisfies all these goals, and is used as the basis for the description
language used by CGEN.

Extensibility is achieved by specifying everything as name/value pairs.
This allows new elements to be added and even CPU specific elements to
be added without complicating the language or requiring a new element in
a @code{define_insn}-like entry to be added to each existing port.
Macros can be used to eliminate the verbosity of repetitively specifying
the ``name'' part, so one can have it both ways.  Imagine GCC's
@file{.md} file elements specified as name/value pairs with macro's
called @code{define_expand}, @code{define_insn}, etc.  that handle the
common cases and expand the entry to the full @code{(define_full_expand
(name addsi3) (template ...) (condition ...) ...)}.

Scheme also uses @code{(foo :keyword1 value1 :keyword2 value2 ...)},
though that isn't implemented yet (or maybe @code{#:keyword} depending
upon what is enabled in Guile).

@node Layout
@subsection Layout

Here is a graphical layout of the hierarchy of elements of a @file{.cpu} file.
		
@example
                           architecture
                           /          \
                      cpu-family1   cpu-family2  ...
                      /         \
                  machine1    machine2  ...
                   /   \
              model1  model2  ...
@end example

Each of these elements is explained in more detail in @ref{RTL}.  The
@emph{architecture} is one of @samp{sparc}, @samp{m32r}, etc.  Within
the @samp{sparc} architecture, the @emph{cpu-family} might be
@samp{sparc32} or @samp{sparc64}.  Within the @samp{sparc32} CPU family,
the @emph{machine} might be @samp{sparc-v8}, @samp{sparclite}, etc.
Within the @samp{sparc-v8} machine classificiation, the @emph{model}
might be @samp{hypersparc} or @samp{supersparc}.

Instructions form their own hierarchy as each instruction may be supported
by more than one machine.  Also, some architectures can handle more than
one instruction set on one chip (e.g. ARM).

@example
                     isa
                      |
                  instruction
                    /   \	   
             operand1  operand2  ... 
                |         |
         hw1+ifield1   hw2+ifield2  ...
@end example

Each of these elements is explained in more detail in @ref{RTL}.

@node Language problems
@subsection Language problems

There are at least two potential problem areas in the language's design.

The first problem is variation in assembly language syntax.  Examples of
this are Intel vs AT&T i386 syntax, and Motorola vs MIT m68k syntax.
I think there isn't a sufficient number of important cases to warrant
handling this efficiently.  One could either ignore the issue for
situations where divergence is sufficient to dissuade one from handling
it in the existing design, or one could provide a front end or
use/extend the existing macro mechanism.

One can certainly argue that description of assembler syntax should be
separated from the hardware description.  Doing so would prevent
complications in supporting multiple or even difficult assembler
syntaxes from complicating the hardware description.  On the other hand,
there is a lot of duplication, and in the end for the intended uses of
CGEN I think the benefits of combining assembler support with hardware
description outweigh the disadvantages.  Note that the assembler
portions of the description aren't used by the simulator @footnote{The
simulator currently uses elements of the opcode table since the opcode
table is a nice central repository for such things.  However, the
assembler/disassembler isn't part of the simulator, and the
portions of the opcode table can be generated and recorded elsewhere
should it prove reasonable to do so.  The CPU description file won't
change, which is the important thing.}, so if one wanted to implement
the disassembler/assembler via other means one can.

The second problem area is relocations.  Clearly part of
processing assembly code is dealing with the relocations involved
(e.g. GOT table specification).  Relocation support necessarily requires
BFD and GAS support, both of which need cleanup in this area.  Rewriting
BFD to provide a better interface so reloc handling in GAS can be
cleaned up is believed to be something this project can and should take
advantage of, and that any attempt at adding relocation support should
be done by first cleaning up GAS/BFD.  That can be left for another day
though. :-)

One can certainly argue trying to combine an ABI description with a
hardware description is problematic as there can be more than one ABI.
However, there often isn't and in the cases where there isn't the
simplified porting and maintenance is worth it, in the author's opinion.
Furthermore, the current language doesn't embed ABI elements
with hardware description elements.  Careful segregation of such things
might ameliorate any problems.

@node Opcodes support
@section Opcodes support

Opcodes support comes in the form of machine generated opcode tables as
well as supporting routines.

@node Simulator support
@section Simulator support

Simulator support comes in the form of machine generated the decoder/executer
as well as the structure that records CPU state information (i.e., registers).

@node Testing support
@section Testing support

@menu
* Assembler/disassembler testing::
* Simulator testing::
@end menu

Inherent in the design is the ability to machine generate test cases both
for the assembler/disassembler and for the simulator.  Furthermore, it
is not unreasonable to add to the description file data specifically
intended to assist or guide the testing process.  What kinds of
additions that will be needed is unknown at present.

@node Assembler/disassembler testing
@subsection Assembler/disassembler testing

The description of instructions and their fields contains to some extent
not only the syntax but the possible values for each field.  For
example, in the specification of an immediate field, it is known what
the allowable range of values is.  Thus it is possible to machine
generate test cases for such instructions.  Obviously one wouldn't want
to test for each number that a number field can contain, however one can
generate a representative set of any size.  Likewise with register
fields, mnemonic fields, etc.  A good starting point would be the edge
cases, the values at either end of the range of allowable values.

When I first raised the possibility of machine generated test cases the
first response I got was that this wouldn't be useful because the same
data was being used to generate both the program and the test cases.  An
error might be propagated to both and thus nullify the test.  For
example if an opcode field was supposed to have the value 1 and the
description file had the value 2, then this error wouldn't be caught.
However, this assumes test cases are always generated during the testing run!
And it ignores the profound amount of typing that is saved by machine
generating test cases!  (I discount the argument that this kind of
exhaustive testing is unnecessary).

One solution to the above problem is to not generate the test cases
during the testing run (which was implicit in the proposal, but perhaps
should have been explicit).  Another solution is to generate the
test cases during the test run but first verify them by some external
means before actually using them in any test.  Another solution is
to have some trust in the generated tests.  Yes, some bugs may be missed,
but given the quantity of testing that can be done, some bugs may still
be caught that would otherwise have been missed.  Plus it's all
machine-driven, minimal human interaction is required.

So how are machine generated test cases verified?  By machine, by hand,
and by time.  The test cases are checked into CVS and are not regenerated
without care.  Every time the test cases are regenerated, the diffs are
examined to ensure the bug triggering the regeneration has been fixed
and that no new bugs have been introduced.  In all likelihood once a
port is more or less done, regeneration of test cases would stop anyway,
and all further changes would be done manually.

``By machine'' means that for example in the case of ports with a native
assembler one can run the test case through the native assembler and use
that as a good first pass.

``By hand'' means one can go through each test case and verifying them
manually.  This is what is done in the case of non-machine generated
test cases, the only difference is the perceived difference in quantity.
And in the case of machine generated test cases comments can be added to
each test to help with the manual verification (e.g. a comment can be
added that splits the instruction into its fields and shows their names
and values).

``By time'' means that this process needn't be done instantaneously.
This is no different than the non-machine generated case again except in
the perceived difference in quantity of test cases.

Note that no claim is made that manually generated test cases aren't
useful or needed.  The goal here is to enhance existing forms of testing,
not replace them.

@node Simulator testing
@subsection Simulator testing

Machine generation of simulator test cases is possible because the
semantics of each instruction is written in a way that is understandable
to the generator.  At the very least, knowledge of what the instructions
are is present!  Obviously there will be some instructions that can't
be adequately expressed in RTL and are thus not amenable to having a
test case being machine generated.  There may even be some RTL'd
semantics that fall into this category.  It is believed, however, that
there will still be a large percentage of instructions amenable to
having test cases machine generated for them.  Such test cases can
certainly be hand generated, but it is believed that this is a large
amount of unnecessary typing that typically won't be done due to the
amount.

An example is the simple arithmetic instructions.  These take zero, one,
or more arguments and produce a result.  The description file contains
sufficient data to generate such an instruction, the hard part is in
providing the environment to set up the required inputs (e.g. loading
values into registers) and retrieve the output (e.g. retrieve a value
from a register).

Certainly at the very least all the administrivia for each test case can
be machine generated (i.e. a template file can be generated for each
instruction, leaving the programmer to fill in the details).

The strategies mentioned for assembler/disassembler machine-generated
test cases also apply here.
