{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1036{\fonttbl {\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}}
{\colortbl ;\red255\green0\blue0;}
\uc1\pard\ulnone\f0\fs20\par
Xilinx Mapping Report File for Design 'uartimpl'\par
Copyright (c) 1995-2000 Xilinx, Inc.  All rights reserved.\par
\par
Design Information\par
------------------\par
Command Line   : m1map -p xcs10-3-tq144 -o map.ncd uartimpl.ngd uartimpl.pcf \par
Target Device  : xs10\par
Target Package : tq144\par
Target Speed   : -3\par
Mapper Version : spartan -- D.19\par
\par
\cf1 Design Summary\par
--------------\par
   Number of errors:        0\par
   Number of warnings:      1\par
   Number of CLBs:             44 out of   196   22%\par
      CLB Flip Flops:      63\par
      4 input LUTs:        63\par
      3 input LUTs:        20 (17 used as route-throughs)\par
   Number of bonded IOBs:      28 out of   111   25%\par
      IOB Flops:            0\par
      IOB Latches:          0\par
   Number of clock IOB pads:    2 out of     8   25%\par
   Number of primary CLKs:      2 out of     4   50%\par
Total equivalent gate count for design: 769\par
Additional JTAG gate count for IOBs:    1344\cf0\par
\par
Table of Contents\par
-----------------\par
Section 1 - Errors\par
Section 2 - Warnings\par
Section 3 - Design Attributes\par
Section 4 - Removed Logic Summary\par
Section 5 - Removed Logic\par
Section 6 - Added Logic\par
Section 7 - Expanded Logic\par
Section 8 - Signal Cross-Reference\par
Section 9 - Symbol Cross-Reference\par
Section 10 - IOB Properties\par
Section 11 - RPMs\par
Section 12 - Guide Report\par
Section 13 - Area Group Summary\par
\par
Section 1 - Errors\par
------------------\par
\par
Section 2 - Warnings\par
--------------------\par
WARNING:OldMap:78 - All of the external outputs in this design are using\par
   slew-rate-limited output drivers.  The delay on speed critical outputs can be\par
   dramatically reduced by designating them as fast outputs in the original\par
   design.  Please see your vendor interface documentation for specific\par
   information on how to do this within your design-entry tool.\par
   Note: You should be careful not to designate too many outputs which switch\par
   together as fast, because this can cause excessive ground bounce.  For more\par
   information on this subject, please refer to the IOB switching characteristic\par
   guidelines for the device you are using in the Programmable Logic Data Book.\par
\par
Section 3 - Design Attributes\par
-----------------------------\par
\par
Section 4 - Removed Logic Summary\par
---------------------------------\par
  58 block(s) removed\par
  13 block(s) optimized away\par
  58 signal(s) removed\par
\par
Section 5 - Removed Logic\par
-------------------------\par
\par
The trimmed logic reported below is either:\par
   1. part of a cycle\par
   2. part of disabled logic\par
   3. a side-effect of other trimmed logic\par
\par
The signal "U1/N255" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C576" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N256" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C577" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N257" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C578" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N258" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C579" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N259" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C580" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N260" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C581" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N261" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C582" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N262" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C583" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N263" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C584" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N264" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C585" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N265" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C586" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N266" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C587" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N267" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C588" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N268" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C589" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N269" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C590" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N270" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C591" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N271" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C592" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N272" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C593" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N273" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C594" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N274" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C595" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N275" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C596" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N276" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C597" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N277" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C598" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N278" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C599" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N279" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C600" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N280" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C601" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N281" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C602" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N282" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C603" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N283" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C604" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N284" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C605" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N285" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C606" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N286" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C607" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N287" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C608" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N288" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C609" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N289" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C610" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N290" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C611" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N291" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C612" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N292" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C613" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N293" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C614" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N294" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C615" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N295" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C616" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N296" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C617" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N297" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C618" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N298" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C619" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N299" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C620" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N300" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C621" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N301" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C622" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N302" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C623" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N303" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C624" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N304" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C625" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N305" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C626" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N306" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C627" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N307" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C628" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N308" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C629" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N309" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C630" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N310" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C631" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N311" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C632" (GND) removed.\par
The signal "U1/N312" is unused and has been removed.\par
 Unused block "U1/C633" (GND) removed.\par
\par
Optimized Block(s):\par
TYPE \tab\tab BLOCK\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/LoadA_reg/$1I37\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/ReadA_reg/$1I37\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/Uart_Rxrate/Cnt_reg/$1I37\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/Uart_Rxrate/O_reg/$1I37\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/Uart_RxUnit/RxAv_reg/$1I37\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/Uart_Txrate/O_reg/$1I37\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/Uart_TxUnit/SyncLoad/C1A_reg/$1I37\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/Uart_TxUnit/SyncLoad/C1S_reg/$1I37\par
vcc \tab\tab U1/Uart_TxUnit/SyncLoad/R_reg/$1I37\par
fdce \tab\tab U1/Uart_Rxrate/Cnt_reg/I$1\par
GND \tab\tab U1/C575\par
INV \tab\tab U1/C515\par
VCC \tab\tab U1/C574\par
\par
Section 6 - Added Logic\par
-----------------------\par
\par
Section 7 - Expanded Logic\par
--------------------------\par
To enable this section, set the detailed map report option and rerun map.\par
\par
Section 8 - Signal Cross-Reference\par
----------------------------------\par
To enable this section, set the detailed map report option and rerun map.\par
\par
Section 9 - Symbol Cross-Reference\par
----------------------------------\par
To enable this section, set the detailed map report option and rerun map.\par
\par
Section 10 - IOB Properties\par
---------------------------\par
"$Net00010_" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"$Net00011_" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"$Net00012_" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"$Net00013_" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"&__A__10" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"&__A__11" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"&__A__12" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"&__A__13" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"&__A__14" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"&__A__15" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"&__A__16" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
"&__A__9" (IOB) : SLEW=SLOW\par
\par
Section 11 - RPMs\par
-----------------\par
\par
Section 12 - Guide Report\par
-------------------------\par
Guide not run on this design.\par
\par
}
 