.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"  $Id: create_disk.1 686 2015-06-04 21:08:08Z mueller $
.\"
.\" Copyright 2013-2015 by Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
.\" 
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH CREATE_DISK 1 2015-06-04 "Retro Project" "Retro Project Manual"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
create_disk \- create disk container file for ti_w11
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY create_disk
.BI \-\-typ "\fR=\fPtyp"
.OP \-\-ini=\fIpat\fP
.OP \-\-bad
.OP \-\-boot
.I FILE
.
.SY create_disk
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
Creates a disk container file \fIFILE\fP with the proper size for a disk of 
type \fItyp\fP. 
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-typ=\fItyp\fR
determines disk type, must be specified.
The list of supported disk types can be obtained with the
.B \-\-help
option.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-ini=\fIpat\fR
determines whether the container file will be initialized with specific
data pattern. Note that the \fB\-\-bad\fP and \fB\-\-boot\fP options will 
overwrite the last track or the first sector(s) respectively.
The default without \fB\-\-ini\fR is to create a container with all zero data.
It is implemented by writing a single zero byte after positioning with 
\fBlseek\fR(2) to the desired end. This creates a file with 'holes' and defers 
the actual allocation of disk space to the point when sectors are written. 
Allowed values for \fIpat\fP are
.RS
.IP \fBzero\fP
creates a disk with all sectors zero'ed. In this case zero's are explicitely
written. The explicit allocation of disk space is the main effect of this
option.
.IP \fBones\fP
creates a disk with all data bytes set to 0xff.
.IP \fBdead\fP
creates a disk with an alternating 0xdead 0xbeaf pattern. Can be helpful
to diagnose whether an operating system accesses uninitialized parts of a disk.
.IP \fBtest\fP
creates a disk with a unique test pattern in each sector. The whole disk
is initialized with groups of 8 16bit words (in PDP-11 little endian) with

.RS
.RS 3
.PD 0
.IP 0: 4
absolute disk byte address, lower word
.IP 1: 4
absolute disk byte address, upper word
.IP 2: 4
current cyclinder number (0 based)
.IP 3: 4
current track/head number (0 based)
.IP 4: 4
current sector number (0 based)
.IP 5: 4
number of cyclinders for disk type
.IP 6: 4
number of tracks/heads for disk type
.IP 7: 4
number of sectors for disk type
.RE
.PD
.PP
A \fBhexdump\fP(1) of a RP06 disk image initialized with 
\fB\-\-ini\fP=\fItest\fP
will look like

.EX
   0000000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 032f 0013 0016
   0000010 0010 0000 0000 0000 0000 032f 0013 0016
   ...
   00001f0 01f0 0000 0000 0000 0000 032f 0013 0016
   0000200 0200 0000 0000 0000 0001 032f 0013 0016
   ...
   a657be0 7be0 0a65 032e 0012 0015 032f 0013 0016
   a657bf0 7bf0 0a65 032e 0012 0015 032f 0013 0016
.EE
.
.RE
.RE
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-bad\fP
creates a DEC standard 044 compliant bad block table on the last track 
of the disk container file.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-boot\fP
creates a PDP-11 dummy boot block. When such a disk is attached and booted
with \fBti_w11\fP(1) or a simh pdp11 a message like

.EX
  ++======================================++
  || This is not a hardware bootable disk ||
  ++======================================++

  Disk image created with 'create_disk --typ=RK05':
    number of cylinders:        203
    tracks per cylinder:          2
    sectors per track:           12
    block size:                 512
    total number of sectors:   4872
    capacity in kByte:         2436

  CPU WILL HALT
.EE

will be printed on the system console and the CPU HALTed.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-help\fP
print full help, with list \fB\-\-typ\fP and \fB\-\-ini\fP options.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXIT STATUS
If the file
.I FILE
can not be created an exit status 1 is returned.

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP "\fBcreate_disk -typ=rk05 rk05.dsk\fR" 4
This will create a zero'ed disk contained sized for a RK05 disk. In most 
cases it is sufficient to create such plain zero'ed disk images.
.
.IP "\fBcreate_disk -typ=rl02 -bad rl02.dsk\fR"
Creates a RL02 sized disk with a 'factory bad block table'. When using 
RLxx, RPxx, or RMxx type disks, especially in conjunction with DEC 
operating systems, it is advisable to create disks with \fB\-\-bad\fP.
.
.IP "\fBcreate_disk -typ=rk05 -ini=test rk05_test.dsk\fR"
Creates a RK05 sized disk with test pattern.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ti_w11 (1)

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
