.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"  $Id: file2tap.1 686 2015-06-04 21:08:08Z mueller $
.\"
.\" Copyright 2015- by Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
.\" 
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH FILE2TAP 1 2015-06-03 "Retro Project" "Retro Project Manual"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
file2tap \- create a tap format tape container from individual files
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY file2tap
.B -c
.I TNAM
.B -b
.I n
.IR FLIST ...
.SY file2tap
.B -a
.I TNAM
.B -b
.I n
.IR FLIST ...
.YS
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
Creates (\fB-c\fR) a new or appends (\fB-a\fR) to an existing tap format tape 
container file \fTNAM\fR and adds files. The tape record size is specified
with a \fB-b\fR option followed by the record size in units 512 bytes.
Each tape file is build from a comma separated list of disk files \fIFLIST\fR, 
which are concatenated and written with a record size given by the last 
\fB-b\fR option.

\fBfile2tap\fR writes to stdout a one line message for each created file which
gives the file number, number of records, the record size in bytes and the 
names of the disk files used to build the tape file.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-c \fITNAM\fR"
create a new tap format tape container with the name \fITNAM\fR.
.IP "\fB\-a \fITNAM\fR"
append to the existing tap format tape container \fITNAM\fR.
.IP "\fB\-b \fIn\fR"
gives the record size, in units of 512 bytes, for the following files.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP "\fBfile2tap -c tape.tap -b 20 patch.tar\fR" 4
converts the \fBtar\fR(1) archive file \fIpatch.tar\fR into a tape
container file \fItape.tap\fR. The record size is 20*512 or 10240 bytes,
the standard block size of Unix V7 format tar archives.

.IP "\fBfile2tap -c tape.tap -b 1 b0,b1,b2 -b 2 f1 f2 -b 20 f3 f4 f5\fR" 4
creates a tape container file \fItape.tap\fR with six tape files. The first
has a record length of 512 bytes and is composed of the concatenation of the
disk files \fIb0\fR, \fIb1\fR, and \fIb2\fR. The second and third tape file
have a record length of 1024 bytes and are created from \fIf1\fR and \fIf2\fR,
respectively. The remaining three files have a record length of 10240 bytes.

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR tap2file (1)

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
