.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"  $Id: tap2file.1 686 2015-06-04 21:08:08Z mueller $
.\"
.\" Copyright 2015- by Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
.\" 
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH TAP2FILE 1 2015-06-03 "Retro Project" "Retro Project Manual"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
tap2file \- split a tap format tape container into individual files
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY tap2file
.OP \-\-pref=p
.I FILE
.
.SY tap2file
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads the tap format tape container \fIFILE\fR and creates for tape file an 
individual disk file. The created files are named \fIpref\fR_nn.dat, where 
\fIpref\fR is either the prefix given with the \fB\-\-pref\fR option or the 
stem of \fIFILE\fR.

\fBtap2file\fR writes to stdout a one line message for each created file which
gives the filename, the number of tape records and the record length. In case
the record length is variable the minimal and the maximal record length is given.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-\-pref\fR=\fIp\fR"
use \fIp\fR as prefix to generate the names of all generated file. If not
specified the stem of the input file name is taken.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-help\fR"
print full help text and exit.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP "\fBtap2file tmscptape.tap\fR" 4
reads the file \fItmscptape.tap\fR and creates a file for each tape file.
Because no \fB\-\-pref\fR option is given the output files will be named
"tmscptape_nn.dat". The stdout output might look like

.EX
  tmscptape_00.dat:     73 records, length   512
  tmscptape_01.dat:     38 records, length  1024
  tmscptape_02.dat:     34 records, length  1024
  tmscptape_03.dat:     36 records, length  1024
  tmscptape_04.dat:     33 records, length  1024
  tmscptape_05.dat:    501 records, length 10240
  tmscptape_06.dat:   3516 records, length 10240
  tmscptape_07.dat:    903 records, length 10240
  tmscptape_08.dat:   4168 records, length 10240
.EE

which indicates that the first file had 512 byte records, the next four 1024
byte records, and the remaining ones 10240 byte records. In case of a tape
generated by a Unix system a record length of 10240 is a good hint this the
file contains a \fBtar\fR(1) archive.

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR file2tap (1)

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
