.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"  $Id: tbw.1 620 2014-12-25 10:48:35Z mueller $
.\"
.\" Copyright 2013-2014 by Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
.\" 
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH TBW 1 2011-11-06 "Retro Project" "Retro Project Manual"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
tbw \- wrapper script to start ghdl based VHDL test benches
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY tbw
.I TBPROG
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ FILEDEF ]...
.RI [ GHDL-OPTIONS ]...
.
.SY tbw
.B \-\-help
.YS
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
Executes the \fBghdl\fP based test bench \fITBPROG\fP in an environment
defined by the descriptor file \fItbw.dat\fP and the \fIFILEDEF\fP
arguments. Any additional options \fIGHDL-OPTIONS\fP are passed on to the test
bench executable.

.SS Backgroud
The VHDL implementation in \fBghdl\fP has no direct support for passing 
command line arguments to the VHDL code. All test benches in the Retro
project use therefore fixed build-in generic file names. By convention
they refer to symlinks (see \fBsymlink\fP(7)) which are setup by 
\fBtbw\fP to point to a specific file prior to the execution of the
test bench.

.SS Default behaviour
In the simplest case \fBtbw\fP assumes a test bench with a single stimulus
file which is opened by convention as \'<TBPROG>_stim\'. The default
stimulus file is named \'<TBPROG>_stim.dat\'. \fBtbw\fP will simply 
define \'<TBPROG>_stim\' as a symlink refering to \'<TBPROG>_stim.dat\', 
or if defined to \fIFILEDEF\fP, and execute \fITBPROG\fP. In essence

.EX
    ln -s -f <TBPROG>_stim.dat <TBPROG>_stim
    <TBPROG> <GHDL-OPTIONS>
.EE
.
.SS Using a \fItbw.dat\fP configuration file
When the generic file name or the stimulus file name does not follow the 
simple default pattern or more than one input file is required a 
configuration file can be used to define the setup. It has the fixed
name \fItbw.dat\fP and is searched the current working directory. The
format is described in section FILES.

In this case the \fIFILEDEF\fP argument can be specified as 'tag=value'
pairs where tag refers to a generic name and value gives the concrete
file name. Useful when several input files are to be specified.
.
.SS Test benches controlled with \fBti_rri\fP
In this case the communication between test bench and the controlling
\fBti_rri\fP is done via two named pipes (see \fBfifo\fP(7)). The test
bench might open in addition a configuration file. This setup is also
defined via the \fItbw.dat\fP file, for details see section FILES.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
The options \fB\-run\fP, \fB\-fifo\fP and \fB\-verbose\fP are processed
by tbw itself. If more than one is given they must be in this order.
.IP \fB\-run\fR
Used for _ISim tb's, runs the tb with a 'run all' command.
.IP \fB\-fifo\fR
Forces usage of rlink_cext fifo, will ignore tbw.dat
.IP \fB\-verbose\fR
show the used tag,value settings before execution

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH GHDL OPTIONS
All options are passed on to the test bench executable. The list of
available options for a \fBghdl\fP generated executable can be inquired
with the "\fB\-\-help\fR" option. Some especially useful options are:
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-\-wave=\fIfile\fR"
dump signal values into a wave file (use file type .ghw). Far superior
to the VCD format and allows to inspect all VHDL records and all data types
with \fBgtkwave\fP(1).
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-\-stack-max-size\fP=\fIn\fR"
set maximum stack size. Very helpful in case of very large models. A value
of \fIn\fP=16384 is in general enough for all generated models, which usually 
have a large number of very simple processes.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-\-stop-time\fI=t\fR"
stop the simulation at time \fIt\fP (in VHDL notation, e.g. 100ns).
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-\-disp-time\fR"
display time as simulation advances.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP "\fB\-\-trace-processes\fR"
display process name before each cycle.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH FILES
.IP "\fI./tbw.dat\fR" 4
This configuration file is searched for in the current working directory
and holds associations between generic file names and concrete file names
for one or more test bench executables. It contains sections of the format

.EX
    [\fITBPROG\fP]
    <generic name 1> = <concrete file name 1>
    <generic name 2> = <concrete file name 2>
...
.EE

.RS
.IP "\fBUsage with Stimulus file based test benches\fR" 4
\fBtbw\fP will create a \fBsymlink\fP(7) with the generic name which
refers to the given concrete file name. A typical example is

.EX
    [tb_nx_cram_memctl_as]
    tb_nx_cram_memctl_stim = tb_nx_cram_memctl_stim.dat
.EE

.IP "\fBUsage with test benches controlled with ti_rri\fR"
The special token \fI<fifo>\fP indicates that a named pipe is used
rather than a normal file. In this case \fBtbw\fP will create a
\fBfifo\fP(7) rather than a symlink. Another special token is
 \fI<null>\fP, it simply translates to \fI/dev/null\fP and can be
used as default value for configuration files. Currently all
\fBrlink\fP based test benches use the same generic names and have
a setup like

.EX
    [tb_w11a_n3]
    rlink_cext_fifo_rx = <fifo>
    rlink_cext_fifo_tx = <fifo>
    rlink_cext_conf = <null>
.EE

.RE
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Stimulus file based test benches
Test benches are usually self-checking and produce a comprehensive log file.
For each checked response the line contains the word \fICHECK\fP and either 
an \fIOK\fP or a \fIFAIL\fP, in the later case in general with an indication
of whats wrong. 
Other unexpected behaviour, like timeouts, will also result in a line 
containing the word \fIFAIL\fP. 
When the simulation stops a line with the word \fIDONE\fP is printed.
These test benches are usually run like

.EX
  tbw <testbenchname> [stimfile] | tee <logfile> | egrep "(FAIL|DONE)"
.EE

where
.RS 2
.PD 0
.IP "\-" 2
\fBtbw\fP sets up the stimulus file and runs the test bench executable
.IP "\-"
\fBtee\fP ensures that the full log is saved
.IP "\-"
\fBegrep\fP filters \fIFAIL\fP and \fIDONE\fP lines, a successful run will 
produce a single \fIDONE\fP line
.PD
.RE

.SS Test benches controlled with \fBti_rri\fP
In these cases the test bench is started via \fBti_rri\fP using the
\fB\-\-run\fP and \fB\-\-fifo\fP options. Also here usually a pipe with 
\fBtee\fP and \fBegrep\fP is used, a typical example is

.EX
  ti_rri \-\-run="tbw tb_tst_rlink_n3" \-\-fifo \-\-logl=3 \-\- \\
        "package require tst_rlink" \\
        "tst_rlink::setup" "tst_rlink::test_all" |\\
     tee tb_tst_rlink_n3_dsim.log |\\
     egrep "(\-[EFW]:|FAIL|PEND|DONE)"
.EE

.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ti_rri (1),
.BR gtkwave (1),
.BR symlink (7),
.BR fifo (7)

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
