.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"  $Id: ti_rri.1 666 2015-04-12 21:17:54Z mueller $
.\"
.\" Copyright 2013-2015 by Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
.\" 
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH TI_RRI 1 2015-04-12 "Retro Project" "Retro Project Manual"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
ti_rri \- \fBRlink\fP Backend Server
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY ti_rri
.OP OPTIONS
.OP COMMANDS
.YS
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBti_rri\fP command creates a \fBtclsh\fP(1) based \fBRlink\fP backend
server session. After loading all basic packages and shared libraries which
implement the tcl binding of the \fBRlink\fP server the command

.RS 2
.PD 0
.IP "-" 2
creates the default \fIrlc\fP and \fIrls\fP commands representing the connection
and the server objects
.IP "-"
loads additional tcl packages when requested with \fB\-\-pack\fP
.IP "-"
sets up logging and debug according to  \fB\-\-log\fP,  \fB\-\-logl\fP,
\fB\-\-dmpl\fP, and \fB\-\-tiol\fP
.IP "-"
starts an additional process if requested with \fB\-\-run\fP
.IP "-"
opens a connection when requested with \fB\-\-fifo\fP, 
\fB\-\-term\fP, or \fB\-\-cuff\fP
.IP "-"
and finally executes all remaining \fICOMMANDS\fP arguments as tcl commands
.PD
.RE
.PP
If no \fICOMMANDS\fP are present or if the \fB\-\-int\fP options is given
an interactive mode is entered with all features of \fBtclsh\fP(1) with
tclreadline loaded.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-pack=\fIplist\fR
load, with 'package require', additional packages. \fIplist\fP is a comma
separated list of package names. Note that the packages
.BR rutiltpp ,
.BR rlinktpp ,
and
.BR rlink
are automatically loaded already by \fBti_rri\fP.
.
.\" -- --run -------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-run=\fIcmd\fR
execute the shell command \fIcmd\fP as subprocess before the \fBrlink\fP
port is opened. This is mainly used to start \fBghdl\fP(1) based test
benches, usually via the \fBtbw\fP(1) wrapper script.
.
.\" -- --fifo ------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-fifo\fR[=\fIname\fR[,\fIopts\fR]]
open a fifo type \fBrlink\fP port. It uses a named pipe, and is usually
employed in conjunction with the \fB\-\-run\fP option.
Optional arguments are
.RS
.IP \fBname\fP
name prefix for the named pipe file names. Default is 'rlink_cext_fifo'.
Two fifo's are generated, one with a '_tx' and one with a '_tx' appended
to the name prefix.
.IP \fBopts\fP
comma separated list of further fifo port options:
.RS
.PD 0
.IP \fBkeep\fP
fifo is kept open on exit
.IP \fBxon\fP
software flow control (xon/xoff)
.IP \fBnoinit\fP
defer link initialization (debug or test benches)
.PD
.RE
.RE
.
.\" -- --term ------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-term\fR[=\fIname\fR[,\fIbaud\fR[,\fIopts\fR]]]
open a serial port type \fBrlink\fP port. Optional arguments are
.RS
.IP \fBname\fP
tty device name, default is 'USB0'. If \fIname\fP does not start with '/'
the name is prefixed with '/dev/tty'.
.IP \fBbaud\fP
serial port baud rate, default is '115k'. Allowed baud rate settings are:
.RS
.PD 0
.IP "" 3
2400, 4800, 9600, 19200, 19k, 38400, 38k,
57600, 57k, 115200, 115k, 230400, 230k,
460800, 460k, 500000, 500k, 921600, 921k,
1000000, 1000k, 1M, 1500000, 1500k,
2000000, 2000k, 2M, 2500000, 2500k,
3000000, 3000k, 3M, 4000000, 4000k, 4M,
5000000, 5000k, 5M, 6000000, 6000k, 6M,
1000000, 10000k, 10M, 12000000, 12000k, 12M

.PD
.RE
.IP \fBopts\fP
comma separated list of further term port options:
.RS
.PD 0
.IP \fBbreak\fP
send a break, do autobaud
.IP \fBcts\fP
hardware flow control (cts/rts)
.IP \fBxon\fP
software flow control (xon/xoff)
.IP \fBnoinit\fP
defer link initialization (debug or test benches)
.PD
.RE
.RE
.
.\" -- --cuff ------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-cuff\fR[=\fIname\fR[,\fIopts\fR]]
open a USB via Cypress FX2 type \fBrlink\fP port. Optional arguments are
.RS
.IP \fBname\fP
USB path, default derived from environment variables RETRO_FX2_VID and 
RETRO_FX2_PID.
.IP \fBopts\fP
comma separated list of further cuff port options:
.RS
.PD 0
.IP \fBtrace\fP
trace USB activities
.IP \fBnoinit\fP
defer link initialization (debug or test benches)
.PD
.RE
.RE
.
.\" -- --log ------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-log=\fIfile\fR
set log file name. Default is to write to \fBstdout\fP(3).
.
.\" -- --logl -----------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-logl=\fIlvl\fR
set rlink logging level. Default is '2', allowed values are:
.RS
.PD 0
.IP \fB0\fP 3
no logging
.IP \fB1\fP 3
log rlink commands with communication errors
.IP \fB2\fP 3
log rlink commands with failed checks
.IP \fB3\fP 3
log all rlink commands
.PD
.RE
.
.\" -- --dmpl -----------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-dmpl=\fIlvl\fR
set rlink dump level. Default is '0', allowed values are as for the
\fB\-\-logl\fP option.
.
.\" -- --tiol -----------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-tiol=\fIlvl\fR
set I/O trace level. Default is '0', allowed values are:
.RS
.PD 0
.IP \fB0\fP 3
no I/O trace
.IP \fB1\fP 3
trace buffer activities
.IP \fB2\fP 3
trace character activities
.PD
.RE
.
.\" -- --int ------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-int\fP
enter interactive mode even when further tcl commands are given on the
\fBti_rri\fP command line.
.
.\" -- --help -----------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-help\fP
print help text and exit
.
.\" -- -- ---------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-\fP
all following arguments are treated as tcl commands.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH COMMANDS
For arguments of the form '@<name>.tcl' the respective file is
sourced. All other arguments are treated as Tcl commands and executed
with eval.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP "\fBti_rri --fifo --run='tbw tb_tst_rlink_n3'" 4
Starts the \fBghdl\fP(1) test bench 'tb_tst_rlink_n3' located in CWD via 
\fBtbw\fP(1). It is assumed that the local \fItbw.dat\fP file configures
fifo communication for the test bench.

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ti_w11 (1),
.BR ghdl (1),
.BR tbw (1),
.BR tclsh (1)

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
