.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"  $Id: vbomconv.1 646 2015-02-15 12:04:55Z mueller $
.\"
.\" Copyright 2010-2015 by Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
.\" 
.\" 
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH VBOMCONV 1 2015-02-15 "Retro Project" "Retro Project Manual"
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
vbomconv \- generate files and actions from vbom manifest files
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY vbomconv
.B \-\-help
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.B \-\-dep_ghdl
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.B \-\-dep_xst
|
.B \-\-dep_isim
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.B \-\-dep_vsyn
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.B \-\-ghdl_i_cmd
|
.B \-\-ghdl_i
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.OP \-\-xlpath=\fIpath\fP
.B \-\-ghdl_a_cmd
|
.B \-\-ghdl_a
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.OP \-\-xlpath=\fIpath\fP
.B \-\-ghdl_m_cmd
|
.B \-\-ghdl_m
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.BI \-\-ghdl_export "\fR=\fPpath"
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.B \-\-xst_prj
|
.B \-\-isim_prj
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.BI \-\-xst_export "\fR=\fPpath"
|
.BI \-\-isim_export "\fR=\fPpath"
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.B \-\-vsyn_prj
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.B \-\-get_top
.I vbom
.
.SY vbomconv
.OP \-\-trace
.B \-\-flist
.I vbom
.YS
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SS Introduction 
\fBvbomconv\fP is the central tool in a build system for 
\fIvhdl\fP projects. Each \fIvhdl\fP source file has an associated
manifest file in \fBvbom\fP(5) format which contains a list of used
libraries and instantiated components, and the name of the 
associated vhdl source file. 
The instantiated components are defined via their \fBvbom\fP file.
All file names are relative to the current directory. 
A recursive traversal through all \fBvbom\fP's 
gives for each vhdl entity all the sources files needed to compile it,
with duplicates removed and in proper compilation order, thus libraries first 
and top level design last.

The \fBvbomconv\fP tool does this traversal of \fBvbom\fP
files and generates, depending on command line options, the files and/or 
commands needed to run a synthesis tool or to build a simulation model. 
Currently supported is synthesis with Xilinx ISE \fBxst\fP Xilinx Vivado
and simulation with  \fBghdl\fP(1) or Xilinx ISE \fBISim\fP.
\fBvbomconv\fP therefore currently generates

.PD 0
.IP "\fB- ghdl\fP" 8
commands for analysis, inspection and make step
.IP "\fB- xst\fP" 8
project files
.IP "\fB- ISim\fP" 8
project files
.IP "\fB- vsyn\fP" 8
project setups for Vivado synthesis
.IP "\fB- make\fP" 8
dependency files
.PD

.PP
Key advantage of this approach is that the individual \fBvbom\fP
files are easy to maintain. They reflect the libraries and components used 
in the vhdl source they describe, a structural change in the vhdl source
usually implies an update of the vbom. The project files are automatically
generated from this 'local' information, which can be of great help in 
projects with many top level designs which large number of entities in 
different constellations.

\fBvbomconv\fP is usually embedded in a GNU \fBmake\fP(1) based build system.
The \fIMakefile\fP's in general just contain a few definitions and includes, 
the whole \fBvbomconv\fP magic is encapsulated in some pattern rules for 
simulation and synthesis. 
Some are given in the EXAMPLES section.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SS Principle of Operation
\fBvbomconv\fP will start with processing the \fIvbom\fP
file given as argument.
Each file name extracted from a \fBvbom\fP is prepended with the directory 
path of the \fBvbom\fP.
This ensures that all file names are relative to working directory under
which \fBvbomconv\fP was started, even though each \fBvbom\fP file holds 
only file names which are relative to the \fBvbom\fP.

\fBvbomconv\fP expects that the entries in the \fBvbom\fP's
are ordered, libraries first, than the components in the order they are
instantiated, finally the name of the associated source file.
Each \fI.vhd\fP file is added to a table of source files.
Each \fI.vbom\fP file is added to a list of \fBvbom\fP's
to be processed if it hasn't been processed yet. 
The sub-\fBvbom\fP's are processed in the order they were found which 
leads to breadth-first traversal of the \fBvbom\fP tree.

After all \fBvbom\fP's
are processed a ranking algorithm will generate an ordered list of source
files in proper compilation order. This ensures that libraries are compiled
before a source refers to them with a '\fIuse\fP' clause, and that entities 
are compiled before they are refered to by an explicit instatiation.

The \fBvbom\fP file format supports conditional inclusion of files via a
condition prefix.
The main purpose of this mechanism is to handle libraries and components 
which are only refered in 
.EX
    -- synthesis translate_off
    -- synthesis translate_on
.EE
sections and are used only for simulation.

The \fBvbom\fP file format has a logical name mechanism to support the 
\fIconfiguration\fP mechanism of vhdl. A logical name can be defined with
.EX
    <lname> = <filename> 
.EE
and it can be used with
.EX
    <lname> : <filename> 
.EE
The first definition seen in the \fIvbom\fP
traversal is taken, all others are ignored. The filename in the usage clause
is the default used in case the logical name wasn't defined.

Last but not least are 3 directives defined in the \fBvbom\fP
file format:
.
.IP "\fB@top\fP:\fIname\fP"
allows to specify the top level design name in case it differs from the 
stem of the \fIvbom\fP file name.
.
.IP "\fB@lib\fP:\fIname\fP"
allows to specify additional system libraries. Currently used to indicate 
that the \fIunisim\fP, \fIunimacro\fP or  \fIsimprim\fP libraries are 
needed by \fBghdl\fP.
.
.IP "\fB@ucf_cpp\fP:\fIfile\fP"
indicates that a \fIfile\fP.ucf file is to be generated by \fBcpp\fP(1)
from a \fIfile\fP.ucf_cpp source file. This allows to modularize ISE ucf files.
.PP
The full description of the file format and examples are given in a
separate man page \fBvbom\fP(5).
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SH USAGE
The \fBvbomconv\fP command has the form
.IP "" 4
.B vbomconv
.RI [ options ] 
.RI [ action ] 
.I vbom
.PP
and must be called, with the exception of the \fB\-\-help\fP case, with 
exactly one \fIvbom\fP file.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.P
.IP \fB\-\-trace\fP
Gives a detailed trace, written to \fIstderr\fP,
of the vbom file traversal and processing, the process of source file ranking
to determine the compilation order, and of the final internal file list and 
property table.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.TP
.BI \-\-xlpath \fR=\fPpath
Defines the location where the \fBghdl\fP compiled Xilinx unisim, unimacro 
or simprim libraries are located. This option is mandatory for 
\fB\-\-ghdl_a\fP and \fB\-\-ghdl_m\fP commands when the design contains 
a \fB@lib\fP directive.
These compiled libs are typically created with the 
\fBxise_ghdl_unisim\fP(1) or \fBxise_ghdl_simprim\fP(1) commands.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SH ACTIONS
.P
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-help\fP
Prints a usage summary to \fIstdout\fP and quits. This action is the only 
one not requiring a \fIvbom\fP file.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-\-dep_ghdl
.TQ
.B \-\-dep_xst
.TQ
.B \-\-dep_isim
.TQ
.B \-\-dep_vsyn
These four actions write to \fIstdout\fP dependency rules for inclusion in 
\fIMakefile\fPs. 
Together with an appropruate pattern rule they allow to automatitize 
the dependency handling, see the EXAMPLES section for practical usage.

\fB\-\-dep_ghdl\fP creates the dependencies for \fBghdl\fP
based simulation models and produces the following types of dependencies
.EX
   \fI<stem>\fP : \fI<stem>\fP.dep_ghdl
   \fI<stem>\fP : \fB*\fP.vhd
   \fI<stem>\fP.dep_ghdl : \fB*\fP.vbom
.EE

\fB\-\-dep_xst\fP creates the dependencies for \fBxst\fP
synthesis make flows and produces the following types of dependencies
.EX
   \fI<stem>\fP.ngc : \fI<stem>\fP.dep_xst
   \fI<stem>\fP.ngc : \fB*\fP.vhd
   \fI<stem>\fP.dep_xst : \fB*\fP.vbom
.EE
with \fB*\fP indicating that one rule will be generated for each file
involved.

If a \fB@ucf_cpp\fP directive was found also rules describing the
.I ucf
file handling are added
.EX
   <stem>.ncd : <stem>.ucf
   include sys_w11a_n2.dep_ucf_cpp
.EE
If this mechanism is used the \fIMakefile\fP must contain, usually via 
another include, a pattern rule to create the \fI.dep_ucf_cpp\fP file, 
for example
.EX
    %.dep_ucf_cpp : %.ucf_cpp
            cpp -I${RETROBASE}/rtl -MM $*.ucf_cpp |\\
                sed 's/\.o:/\.ucf:/' > $*.dep_ucf_cpp
.EE

\fB\-\-dep_isim\fP creates the dependencies for ISE \fBISim\fP
based simulation models and produces the following types of dependencies
.EX
   \fI<stem>\fP_ISim : \fI<stem>\fP.dep_isim
   \fI<stem>\fP_ISim : \fB*\fP.vhd
   \fI<stem>\fP.dep_isim : \fB*\fP.vbom
.EE

\fB\-\-dep_vsyn\fP creates the dependencies for Vivado synthesis make flows
and produces the following types of dependencies
.EX
   \fI<stem>\fP.bit : \fI<stem>\fP.dep_vsyn
   \fI<stem>\fP.bit : \fB*\fP.vhd \fB*\fP.xdc
   \fI<stem>\fP_syn.dcp : \fB*\fP.vhd \fB*\fP.xdc
   \fI<stem>\fP_rou.dcp : \fB*\fP.vhd \fB*\fP.xdc
   \fI<stem>\fP.dep_vsyn : \fB*\fP.vbom
.EE
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-\-ghdl_i_cmd
.TQ
.B \-\-ghdl_i
The \fB\-\-ghdl_i_cmd\fP action writes to \fIstdout\fP
a \fB"ghdl -i"\fP command for the \fBghdl\fP inspection step with all 
source file names in proper compilation order. The \fB\-\-ghdl_i\fP
action immediately executes this command via \fBexec\fP(3).
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-\-ghdl_a_cmd
.TQ
.B \-\-ghdl_a
The \fB\-\-ghdl_a_cmd\fP action writes to \fIstdout\fP a list of 
\fB"ghdl -a"\fP commands for the \fBghdl\fP analysis step. 
The commands are in proper compilation order. The \fB\-\-ghdl_a\fP
action immediately executes these commands via \fBexec\fP(3).
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-\-ghdl_m_cmd
.TQ
.B \-\-ghdl_m
The \fB\-\-ghdl_m_cmd\fP action writes to \fIstdout\fP
a \fB"ghdl -m"\fP command for the \fBghdl\fP inspection make with all 
required library and external object file qualifiers.
The \fB\-\-ghdl_m\fP action immediately executes this command via
\fBexec\fP(3).
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-\-xst_prj
.TQ
.B \-\-isim_prj
These two actions write to \fIstdout\fP a project file suitable for ISE
\fBxst\fP or \fBISim\fP, respectively. 
The vhdl source files are in proper compilation order. See
the EXAMPLES section for practical usage in a make flow.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-\-vsym_prj
This action write to \fIstdout\fP a Tcl script suitable as project definition
for Vivado synthesis. This script is source'ed or eval'ed and defines the
source fileset and the constraints fileset. The vhdl source files are in 
proper compilation order. 
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.TP
.BI \-\-xst_export \fR=\fPpath
.TQ
.BI \-\-ghdl_export \fR=\fPpath
.TQ
.BI \-\-isim_export \fR=\fPpath
These three actions create a flat copy of all source files needed for a 
\fBxst\fP synthesis or a \fBghdl\fP or \fBISim\fP
simulation model in the directory \fIpath\fP.
The sub directory structure is lost, all files will be in directory
\fIpath\fP. This is for example helpful for setting up an ISE project.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-get_top\fP
Returns the top level entity name to \fIstdout\fP.
Is by default the stem of the \fIvbom\fP file name, or given by a
\fB@top\fP directive picked up during \fBvbom\fP traversal.
.
.\" ----------------------------------------------
.IP \fB\-\-flist\fP
Write an alphabetically sorted list of all source and vbom files to
\fIstdout\fP.
This information is for example helpful to build a project export tool.
Note that in contrast to most other actions the files are not in compilation
but in alphabetic order, and that also the \fBvbom\fP files are included 
in this list.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns a non-zero exit status when the
.I vbom
file is not found or readable or none or multiple actions are given.
.PP
The \fB\-\-ghdl_a\fP, \fB\-\-ghdl_i\fP, or \fB\-\-ghdl_m\fP
actions use \fBexec\fP(3) to execute the \fBghdl\fP command. 
In these cases the caller will see the exit status of \fBghdl\fP.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH BUGS
.IP \(bu 2
Duplicate file elimination fails when one source file is refered to by
different \fIvbom\fP's
with different paths, like for example the file 
.I aa/bb/cc/foo.vdh
seen from
.I aa/xx/yy
via
.EX
    ../../bb/cc/foo.vhd
    ../../../aa/bb/cc/foo.vdh
.EE
The synthesis and simulation tools will react with sometimes hard to
trace error messages.
.br
To avoid this problem ensure that building of the relative paths
is always done with the minimal number of \fI../\fP to reach the file.
.
.IP \(bu 2
The handling of \fIucf\fP files with the \fB@ucf_cpp\fP directive
is a kludge and should be revised.
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SS Auto-Dependency Generation
The \fB\-\-dep_xst\fP, \fB\-\-dep_ghdl\fP and \fB\-\-dep_isim\fP
actions allow to setup together with the auto-rebuild and restart semantics 
of the GNU \fBmake\fP(1) \fIinclude\fP directive to fully automatize the
proper generation of dependencies. 
Just add to the \fIMakefile\fP
a pattern rule to create the dependency rule files from the \fBvbom\fP 
files and include them. In case they don't yet exist or are out of date 
\fBmake\fP(1) will (re-)create them and restart. Example for using
\fB\-\-dep_xst\fP in a \fIMakefile\fP :
.PP
.EX
    VBOM_all = $(wildcard *.vbom)
    ...
    %.dep_xst: %.vbom
            vbomconv --dep_xst $< > $@
    ...
    include $(VBOM_all:.vbom=.dep_xst)
.EE
.PP
After renames and deletions of source files the dependency rule files can have
dangling entries which cause 'No rule to make target' errors. In that case
just delete all '.dep_*' files. The script \fBrm_dep\fP(1)
will do that recursively for a whole directory tree.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SS Xst Synthesis
A simple \fBmake\fP(1) flow for synthesis with \fBxst\fP using 
ISE \fBxflow\fP and the \fB\-\-xst_prj\fP action and a pattern 
rule looks like 
.PP
.EX
    %.ngc: %.vbom
            if [ ! -d ./ise ]; then mkdir ./ise; fi
            (cd ./ise; vbomconv --xst_prj ../$< > $*.prj)
            (cd ./ise; touch $*.xcf)
            xtwi xflow -wd ise -synth xst_vhdl.opt $*.prj 
            (cd ./ise; chmod -x *.* )
            if [ -r ./ise/$*.ngc ]; then cp -p ./ise/$*.ngc .; fi
            if [ -r ./ise/$*_xst.log ]; then cp -p ./ise/$*_xst.log .; fi
.EE
.PP
It creates a working directory \fI./ise\fP, the xst project file, runs 
\fBxst\fP via ISE \fBxflow\fP, and copies the \fIngc\fP and \fIlog\fP files 
back into the working directory. 
The ISE environment is started with \fBxtwi\fR(1) wrapper.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SS Ghdl Simulation
A simple \fBmake\fP(1) flow for building a \fBghdl\fP simulation model from 
the sources described by a \fBvbom\fP file is given by the following 
pattern rule:
.PP
.EX
    % : %.vbom
            vbomconv --ghdl_i $<
            vbomconv --ghdl_m $<
.EP
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------
.SS Collecting Statistics
A simple way to determine the number of sources involved in a
synthesis or simulation model is to count with \fBwc\fP(1)
the lines of a \fB\-\-xst_prj\fP or \fB\-\-isim_prj\fP
output like in
.PP
.EX
    vbomconv --xst_prj     sys_w11a_n2.vbom | wc
    vbomconv --ghdl_a_cmd  tb_w11a_n2.vbom  | wc
    vbomconv --isim_prj    tb_w11a_n2.vbom  | wc
.EP
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR vbom (5),
.BR rm_dep (1),
.BR ghdl (1),
.BR xtwi (1),
.BR cpp (1),
.br
.BR xise_ghdl_simprim (1),
.BR xise_ghdl_unisim (1)
.
.\" ------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
Walter F.J. Mueller <W.F.J.Mueller@gsi.de>
